	Placed in the public domain in 2006 by the TeX Users Group.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Q/A on PostScript Preview, the Y&Y TeX System, and migrating from Unix:
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

> Q1.	Does the Y&Y TeX System include a PS or EPS previewer?  
>	For example, if I include EPS figures, can I view them 
>	as a part of the DVI preview?  

In the Windows world, EPS files have previews.  The previewer in the Y&Y TeX
system shows all such previews in EPS files.  There is no need for a separate
PostScript interpreter.  Just about all Windows applications that can export
EPS will include previews (unless you explicitly turn previews off). This is
because otherwise such applications are not usable with MS Word, Quark,
Pagemaker, Adobe Illustrator and other Windows applications, and hence
could not be effectively sold in the Windows market.

The Y&Y TeX System supports all preview formats, including the platform
independent TIFF format, which is the most common.  We also support the
Windows specific WMF preview, produced by a small number of Windows programs,
as well as the EPSI format used by some Unix programs.

A note: Many people migrating from Unix turn off previews in Windows graphics
applications that produce EPSF Files because their older TeX system could not
handle the binary headers in EPSF files with previews. Then, of course, only
a bounding box will be shown in the previewer.  The LaTeX 2e graphics package
has no trouble with previews, and trivial changes to epsf.tex and psfig.sty
corrects those older macro packages as well (details supplied with the system).

If you do have hand generated EPS without preview you can add a preview using
a flexible commercial PS interpreter like Transverter Pro from TechPool
Software, or the public domain Ghostview (which is available for Windows).

Also note that in some cases EPS is not the ideal format.  For example,
images (rectangular arrays of pixels of grey level or color) are much
more compactly represented in TIFF form than EPS.  The Y&Y TeX system
supports TIFF format for printing and for on screen viewing.  People
migrating from Unix are not that familiar with the powerful TIFF image
format since TeX systems on Unix do not support it.

Finally, images in Windows Meta File (WMF) format can also be inserted,
printed and previewed.  While windows specific, these are sometimes a good
alternative to EPS or TIFF for graphics since they are compact, yet can be 
of high fidelity.

> Q2:	How about the PostScript file produced by the Y&Y TeX System PS
>	printer driver, can that be viewed using one of your packages?  
>	That is, do you have something that is the equivalent of 
>	Ghostview for unix machines? 

You don't need a PS previewer to look at output from the printer driver since
you can see the file in the previewer, complete with previews of inserted
graphics in EPS, TIFF or WMF format. In Unix many people instead use a
PostScript-specific two-stage process, because previewer on Unix do not
support previews in EPS files.  

The Y&Y TeX System is - as far possible device independent - and does away
with the need for a PS interpreter.  For example, it can print to any Windows
supported printer driver, not just PostScript printers.  Also, for example,
the support for TPIC \special (used by the LaTeX eepic package) is device
independent, not tied to a PostScript implementation.

> Q3.	Do you support macros such as psfrag?  psfrag allows one
>	to use latex commands in an EPS file, so that equations can
>	be displayed in the included EPS files.

Yes, the current version of psfrag is compatibly with our system.  However,
we don't consider this a great way of adding text to figures.  Since our
fonts are in industry standard ATM compatible Adobe Type 1 format (known as
`PostScript' fonts in the Unix world) you can use them in any drawing program
in Windows.  These applications are typically more powerful than the drawing
tools that exist in the TeX world.

Note also that you can export typeset material from the Y&Y TeX System by
copying it to the clipboard and then pasting it into the graphics application
--- without loss of quality (i.e. it is not a bitmap that is transferred).
This is a very convenient way to add mathematical labels to graphics.

> Q4. What package would you recommend that would generate reliable EPS
>	files for inclusion in LaTex files?  That is, do you have any
>	recommendations for something that would be equivalent to XFIG?

There are many powerful drawing packages available in Windows, including
Corel Draw, Adobe Illustrator and Micrografx Designer.  For simple graphs
lower end shareware and freeware tools can be used.
